README

DNS2db is a system for gathering and storing DNS messages. The DNS
messages are either captured directly from a network interface, 
from the "wire", or from a previously saved file of network traffic.
The DNS messages are then decoded and stored in one or more sqlite3
databases for later analysis. DNS2db is designed so that it can run 
unattended as long as there is sufficient disk space for the database
file(s).


Architecture

DNS2db consists of two parts; tracedns and dns2sqlite. tracedns captures
network packets, extract the DNS messages and output CSV strings
consisting of a timestamp, IP-adresses, protocol information and the
actual DNS message. The later is encoded as a string of hexadecimal
values (two per byte of the original DNS message). dns2sqlite parses
the CSV string from tracedns, dissect the message and store the 
resulting DNS data in sqlite3 databases for later analysis.

The idea behind this two stage approach was to make it easy for others
to replace the dns2sqlite backend with something that may be more
appropriate.


Running DNS2db

To run DNS2db edit the configuration file and run dns2db.pl 
or the dns2db.sh start/stop script if it has been installed.
DNS2db can also be run directly on the command line, for example:

   tracedns -f 'port 53' pcapint:en0 
   | dns2sqlite -t template_db.db -d dns2db -f /tmp -i 5

This will read network data from en0 network interface and store each
captured DNS packet in databases named "dns2db<timestamp>", located
in a subdirctory of /tmp named "<datestamp>". The time- and datestamps
are based on the date and time a packet was captured. You may need to
use sudo (or su) to get permission to read from the given network source.

The "-f" parameter to tracedns is a BPF filter string. If it is not given,
tracedns will capture every packet from the given source (in this case,
en0). However, dns2sqlite basically assume that it is given DNS messages 
and thus a 'port 53' BPF filer is appropriate. If dns2sqlite fail to
parse a message as a correct DNS message then that message will be 
stored as an "unhandled message". 

The "-i x" parameter to dns2sqlite tell dns2sqlite to create a new 
database for every x minutes of data based on the timestamp from the
captured packets. 

For other options and how to create the necessary template database
please use the "--help" option to the commands and see the INSTALL
document.


